PAGE 1
Detection, Attribution, Narration: An End-to-End Pipeline for
Explainable Money Mule Identification
Yuge Zhang
yugezhang@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Yuanxing Zhang
yuanxingzhang@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Yichao Jin
jinyichao@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Khairul Amsyar Mohd
Razis
khairulmohdrazis@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Nicholas Qi An Choo
nicholaschoo3@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Kai Yin Anders Wong
anderswong@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Xinyan Tang
tangxy@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Kenneth Zhu Ke
kennethzhu@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Wee Keong Dennis Lee
dennislee@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Jingyuan Zhao
jingyuanzhao@ocbc.com
OCBC, Singapore
Abstract
Money mule accounts are critical facilitators of financial fraud, yet
detecting them at scale remains challenging due to the heteroge-
neous nature of transactional and behavioural data. We present an
end-to-end pipeline for customer-level mule detection comprising
three stages: (1) a LightGBM classifier trained on 280 engineered
features spanning transaction patterns, account demographics, net-
work topology, and temporal behaviour; (2) a TreeSHAP attribution
layer that decomposes each prediction into feature contributions;
and (3) a large language model (LLM) module that converts SHAP
attributions into analyst-facing natural-language narratives. We
evaluate across three open-weight LLM families and assess ex-
planation quality through analyst feedback. In a live production
deployment, the system achieves a yield rate of 89%, up from 61%
under the incumbent rule-based system, with monthly alert vol-
ume expanding from 211 to 302, reflecting broader true-positive
coverage rather than increased noise. This corresponds to a 60%
incremental adverse detection beyond existing review workflows,
substantially outperforming the rule-based approach. Qualitative
feedback from analysts indicates that LLM-generated narratives
reduce cognitive load during alert triage. We further discuss impli-
cations of deploying LLM-augmented explainability in regulated
financial environments.
1 Introduction
Money mules, which are usually individual bank accounts involved
in laundering the proceeds of fraud, represent one of the most
prevalent drivers in the financial crime ecosystem. Mule accounts
receive illicit funds from victims and rapidly disperse them onward,
often across jurisdictions, making recovery difficult and enabling
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, Jeju, Korea
©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
downstream criminal activity at scale [12]. Despite increasing reg-
ulatory scrutiny, detection remains difficult because mule accounts
often mimic legitimate customer behaviour during onboarding and
early account activity, revealing anomalous patterns only when
examined across multiple feature dimensions simultaneously.
A further operational challenge is that detection alone is insuffi-
cient. In practice, every flagged customer must be reviewed by a
human analyst before action can be taken. Therefore, the usefulness
of a detection system depends not only on its precision and recall,
but also on how quickly and confidently analysts can triage the
alerts it produces. Thisexplainabilityrequirement is often under-
weighted in the academic literature, but is critical in production.
The incumbent approach in most financial institutions relies
on deterministic threshold-based rules (e.g., more than 𝑁 trans-
actions to new payees within 𝑇 days). While interpretable, these
approaches suffer from a well-documented precision-recall trade-
off. Tightening rules reduces false positives but allows sophisticated
mules to evade detection, while loosening them overwhelms ana-
lyst queues with false alerts. The rigidity of static rules also means
that they cannot adapt to the evolving mule typologies without
costly, repeated manual recalibration.
Critically, these rule-based systems usually operate on individual
features in isolation. Money mule behaviour, however, is inherently
multi-dimensional, where no single indicator is sufficiently diagnos-
tic. Instead, it relies heavily on thecombinationof subtle anomalies
across transaction velocity, network structure, temporal patterns,
and account demographics. This distinctive signature cannot be
easily captured by deterministic rules.
This paper presents an end-to-end pipeline that addresses both
detection and explainability challenges. Our contributions include
• High-dimensional ML classifier:A LightGBM model [ 7]
trained using 280 engineered features for customer-level
mule detection, with calibration analysis demonstrating reli-
able probability estimates across score ranges.
• LLM-augmented explainability:A pipeline that feeds
SHAP [9] attributions into large language models to gener-
ate natural-language narratives. We assess output quality
through analyst feedback.
arXiv:2607.17586v1  [cs.CR]  20 Jul 2026
PAGE 2
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, K. Razis, N. Choo, K. Wong, X. Tang, K. Zhu, W. Lee, and J. Zhao
• Live production validation:Deployment in an AML (Anti-
Money Laundering) production environment achieves a yield
rate of 89%, up from 61% under the incumbent rule-based
system. Monthly alert volume expanded from 211 to 302, re-
flecting broader true-positive coverage rather than increased
noise. This corresponds to 60% incremental adverse detection
beyond existing review workflows, with qualitative analyst
feedback indicating reduced cognitive load during triage
compared to raw SHAP visualizations.
• Operational insights:Practical lessons on integrating ML
and LLM components into analyst workflows within regu-
lated financial environments, including guardrails against
LLM hallucination and considerations for model governance.
2 Related Work
Our work sits at the intersection of three research streams, in-
cluding machine learning for financial crime detection, post-hoc
explainability for high-stakes models, and the emerging use of LLMs
to translate quantitative explanations into natural language. We
review each in turn, highlighting the gap our pipeline addresses.
2.1 Machine Learning for AML Detection
Machine learning has been applied to fraud and AML detection for
more than two decades [12], yet work targeting money mule ac-
counts specifically remains limited. Most published approaches
frame the problem at the transaction level and rely on graph-
based methods. Savage et al. [13] used supervised learning in small
networks grouped by transactional interactions. More recently,
Jambhrunkar et al. [6] proposed MuleTrack, a Markov-chain-based
framework for detecting mule accounts in India’s UPI (Unified
Payments Interface) system. Huang et al. [5] presented the Mule-
Trace algorithm to locate mule nodes within transaction graphs by
tracking entire laundering chains.
While graph-based methods are well-suited to network-level
detection, they require access to full transaction graphs, which is
often infeasible in siloed institutional environments. In contrast,
our approach operates ontabular features engineered at the cus-
tomer level, requiring only data available within a single institu-
tion. Gradient boosting methods, particularly LightGBM [7], have
demonstrated strong performance on tabular financial data. Taha
and Malebary [14] showed that an optimised LightGBM achieves
state-of-the-art results on credit card fraud detection. Xu et al. [16]
proposed deep boosting decision trees that embed neural networks
into gradient boosting while preserving interpretability. To date,
gradient boosting approaches remain the dominant approach in
deployed AML systems, yet published work rarely reports produc-
tion deployment metrics such as analyst yield rate and increased
coverage of real-world cases.
2.2 Explainability in High-Stakes ML
In regulated financial environments, model transparency is both
an operational necessity and a compliance requirement. Regula-
tors, including the United States (US) government [11] and Euro-
pean Union (EU) [4], increasingly mandate financial institutions to
demonstrate how model output informs decisions. SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) [9] had become the de facto standard for
local feature attribution, due to its game-theoretic foundations and
the efficiency of the TreeSHAP algorithm [8] for tree-based models.
However, a persistent gap exists between what these methods
produce, mainly numeric feature-contribution vectors, and what
operational analysts need to act on. Waterfall plots and beeswarm
diagrams require statistical literacy to interpret and slow down alert
triage, particularly when analysts must process hundreds of alerts
per day. Thislast-mile explainability gapis the primary motivation
for our LLM interpretation module.
2.3 LLMs as Explanation Narrators
The use of LLMs to convert quantitative AI model outputs into
natural language is a rapidly growing research direction. Martens
et al. [10] demonstrated that LLM-generated narratives from SHAP
values are found convincing by over 90% of surveyed non-experts
and help users more accurately summarize AI decisions compared
to raw SHAP plots alone. Zytek et al. [19] developed Explingo, a
dual-LLM system comprising a narrator that generates explana-
tion narratives and an automated grader that evaluates them on
accuracy, completeness, and fluency. Bello et al. [ 2] presented a
three-level framework for LLM-enhanced explainable AI, including
a case study that translates SHAP values from a loan-denial model
into conversational narratives. Zeng [ 18] further explores using
LLMs to enhance the interpretability of SHAP values specifically,
demonstrating that model-generated narratives can surface feature
interactions that raw attribution plots obscure.
These works established the feasibility of LLM-based XAI narra-
tion. However, evaluation to date has focused on narrative quality
metrics rather than downstream operational impact, and deploy-
ment constraints such as on-premise hosting for data residency
have not been highlighted. Our work extends this direction with
production-validated evidence from a live AML setting using self-
hosted open-weight models.
3 Methodology
3.1 System Overview
The pipeline executes three modules sequentially for each customer:
(1) feature engineering and classification, (2) SHAP attribution, and
(3) LLM interpretation. This is followed by a domain expert work-
flow for alert triage. Figure 1 presents the end-to-end architecture.
First, raw data from multiple source systems are transformed into a
tabular feature matrix at the customer level and scored by a Light-
GBM classifier. The model outputs are then decomposed via Tree-
SHAP into per-feature contributions and narrated by self-hosted
open-weight LLM models into a domain-expert-facing explana-
tion. Alerts are ranked by predicted probability and surfaced to
human analysts together with the generated narrative. A feedback
loop from confirmed dispositions back into the watchlist and label
pipeline to support periodic model retraining.
3.2 Data and Feature Engineering
Data sources.The model ingests data from multiple internal sys-
tems, including core banking transactions, customer onboarding
records, device and channel metadata, and internal/external watch-
list and sanctions feeds.
PAGE 3
Detection, Attribution, Narration: An End-to-End Pipeline for Explainable Money Mule Identification KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea
Figure 1: End-to-end system architecture for LLM-augmented money mule detection. The pipeline flows from raw data sources
(left) through feature engineering (280 features), LightGBM classification with TreeSHAP attribution, LLM-based narrative
generation, and into the domain expert workflow. Dashed line indicates the feedback loop for model retraining.
The training dataset includes 2,176 customer-level records across
2,115 unique customers.
Labels are derived from two primary sources of ground truth. The
first consists of customers subject to Seizure Orders (SOs) filed by
police officers under the Criminal Procedure Code (CPC), wherein
affected customers are assigned a positive label, reflecting a legal
determination that the funds are suspected proceeds of criminal
activity. The second source comprises analyst-confirmed money
mule cases, where customers have been reviewed and adjudicated
by financial crime investigators. Customers confirmed as mules are
labeled positive; those cleared are labeled negative.
In total, 1,680 customers (77.2%) are labeled as mules (positive
class) and 496 (22.8%) as non-mules (negative class), yielding a
positive-to-negative ratio of approximately 3.4:1. This distribution
does not reflect the true population prevalence of money mule
activity. To better approximate the real-world class distribution, ad-
ditional negative samples are drawn from the unlabeled population
and incorporated into the training set, reducing the positive-to-
negative ratio to 1:5.
Feature taxonomy.Over 280 features are engineered at the
customer level and organized into five overlapping feature groups,
as summarized in Table 1.
All features are computed over multiple time windows (e.g., 7,
30, 90, 180 days) to capture both short-term bursts and longer-term
behavioural drift.
Features are constructed by aggregating raw transactional and
relational data at the customer level across multiple lookback win-
dows of 7, 30, 90, and 180 days. For each window, aggregation
functions including count, sum, min, max, and standard deviation
are applied to capture transaction frequency, volume, and disper-
sion. The diversity of counterparties and channels is measured
using cardinality counts across unique recipients, senders, coun-
tries, and transaction channels. Two types of derived ratio features
are computed, including credit-to-debit ratios for both transaction
count and transaction value within each look-back window, as well
as short-to-long-term velocity ratios that contrast 7-day activity
with a 180-day baseline to identify sudden increases in transactional
behaviour.
Missing values in numeric features are imputed with zero, which
is semantically appropriate as the absence of a transaction record
implies zero activity. Categorical features retain missing values and
are handled natively by the model. To prevent division-by-zero
artefacts in ratio features, zero denominators are substituted with
a missing indicator prior to computation.
No explicit post-engineering feature selection procedure, such
as recursive feature elimination or correlation-based filtering, was
applied. The full set of 280 engineered features was presented to the
model, with implicit feature selection performed by the gradient-
boosted tree algorithm through its split-gain optimisation criterion.
3.3 LightGBM Classifier
We use LightGBM [7] for binary classification at the customer level,
predicting the probability that a customer is operating as a money
mule. LightGBM is chosen for its efficiency on high-dimensional
tabular data, native categorical feature handling, and strong empir-
ical performance in deployed financial systems.
Class imbalance.Although money mule accounts are rare in the
real-world population, we apply negative sampling during training
PAGE 4
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, K. Razis, N. Choo, K. Wong, X. Tang, K. Zhu, W. Lee, and J. Zhao
Table 1: Summary of Feature Groups
Feature
Group
Count Representative Examples
Transaction
patterns
263 Transaction count and amount for all
(debit and credit), debit, and credit
transactions; credit-to-debit ratios; pass-
through frequency and amount; equiva-
lent statistics for STR (Suspicious Trans-
action Report)-linked counterparties and
high/medium-risk geographies
Account
demo-
graphics
15 Customer tenure, age, country of domicile,
number of active accounts, recency of ac-
count opening/closing, number of police
orders received, and recency of last police
order
Network /
graph
47 Number and types of C2C relationships,
number of connected customers with STR
filings, transaction value linked to net-
work STRs
Temporal
behaviour
37 Short-term to long-term velocity ratios
comparing 7-day activity against 180-day
baseline for all (debit and credit), debit,
credit, and STR-linked transactions, cap-
turing sudden spikes in activity
Device /
session /
channel
16 Number of distinct transaction channels
used across multiple lookback windows,
including channel diversity for high-risk
geography transactions and STR-linked
entities
Note:Feature counts sum to more than the total of 280 as certain features span
multiple groups.
to construct a dataset with a positive-to-negative ratio of 1:5. This
introduces an engineered class imbalance in the training set. To
address this, we use the scale_pos_weight parameter, set to the
ratio of negative to positive samples in the training data, which
up-weights the loss contribution of positive examples.
Hyperparameter tuning.We perform grid search over the
following hyperparameter space, selecting the configuration that
maximises AUC-PR on the validation set as shown in table 2.
Temporal train/test split.To prevent data leakage and simulate
realistic deployment conditions, we split the data temporally. In
particular, the model is trained on customers observed before a
cutoff date and evaluated on customers appearing after that date.
Calibration.Since the predicted probability directly determines
alert ranking and analyst workload, well-calibrated scores are es-
sential. We assess calibration using reliability diagrams and the
Expected Calibration Error (ECE), and apply Platt scaling where
necessary. Platt scaling fits a logistic regression on a held-out valida-
tion set to map raw LightGBM scores to better-aligned probabilities,
ensuring that a predicted score of 0.8 more faithfully reflects an 80%
empirical likelihood of money mule behaviour rather than being
an arbitrary model output.
3.4 SHAP Attribution Layer
For each customer selected for explanation—either those exceeding
the alert threshold or a user-defined top-N set—we compute exact
SHAP values using TreeSHAP [8], which exploits the tree structure
of LightGBM for polynomial-time computation. TreeSHAP decom-
poses the predicted log-odds into additive per-feature contributions,
satisfying local accuracy, missingness, and consistency axioms [9].
From the full set of 280 SHAP values per prediction, we select
thetop 10 features by absolute SHAP magnitudefor down-
stream LLM interpretation. This selection balances two concerns,
providing sufficient context for a meaningful narrative while keep-
ing the prompt concise enough for reliable LLM generation. For
each selected feature, we extract the feature name, its raw value
for the account, the SHAP contribution value, and the direction of
influence (i.e., positive = increased probability of the mule, negative
= decreased probability).
3.5 LLM Interpretation Module
The final stage translates the structured SHAP output into a natural-
language narrative that analysts can read during alert triage.
Table 2: Selected Hyperparameters for the Model
Hyperparameter Selected Value
num_leaves 31
max_depth 8
learning_rate 0.03
min_child_samples 200
subsample 0.7
colsample_bytree 0.7
reg_alpha 0.1
reg_lambda 5.0
Deployment.All LLMs are deployed on-premise on a single
NVIDIA H100 GPU to ensure that customer data never leaves the
institution’s infrastructure. We evaluated three models, including
Gemma-3-27B [15], GPT-OSS-120B [1], and Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-
Instruct [17], with one selected for production deployment based
on the evaluation described below.
Prompt design.The prompt consists of three elements.
(1) Prediction context:the customer’s mule probability score
and the score percentile.
(2) SHAP evidence:the top-10 feature attributions, each pre-
sented as a (feature name, feature value, SHAP contribution,
direction) tuple.
(3) Instruction template:specifying output structure using
a fixed JSON schema with red flags, reasons, and evidence
references; tone (factual, concise); and constraints (cite only
features present in the SHAP evidence; do not speculate
beyond the provided data).
Narrative constraints and review.We constrain LLM-generated
narratives through the prompt template and periodic human review
to reduce the risk of unsupported or misleading explanations.
PAGE 5
Detection, Attribution, Narration: An End-to-End Pipeline for Explainable Money Mule Identification KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea
• Prompt constraints:the prompt instructs the LLM to cite
only features present in the top-10 SHAP input, avoid spec-
ulation beyond the provided case data, and structure the
output using a fixed JSON schema. The prompt also requires
each red flag to reference the specific feature names support-
ing the explanation.
• Human review:domain experts provide periodic feedback
on narrative quality through a lightweight rating mechanism
integrated into the alert triage interface, enabling ongoing
monitoring of explanation fidelity.
4 Experiments and Results
4.1 Experimental Setup
Temporal split.The dataset is divided by a temporal cutoff. Ac-
counts observed before the cutoff form the training and validation
sets, and accounts appearing only after the cutoff date form the
held-out test set.
The dataset is split chronologically into training, validation, and
test sets to prevent data leakage. The model is trained on data from
January 2025 up to eight weeks before each test period. The eight
weeks immediately preceding the test period serve as the validation
set to monitor model performance. Testing is conducted over four
consecutive weekly periods in December 2025.
Evaluation metrics.We report standard classification metrics
where available, including precision, recall, F1-score, and AUC-PR,
on the held-out test set. However, the primary metric for evaluating
operational impact isyield rate, defined as
Yield Rate= Alerts confirmed as true mules
Total alerts reviewed by analysts (1)
The yield rate is measured on live production alerts rather than
the held-out test set, reflecting the end-to-end effectiveness of the
system, including the analyst-in-the-loop decision process. This
metric directly captures what matters operationally: how often an
analyst’s time spent reviewing an alert leads to a confirmed case.
Baseline.We compare against the incumbent rule-based de-
tection system that was in production prior to our pipeline. The
rule-based system uses deterministic thresholds on individual trans-
action features (e.g., transaction velocity, counterparty count, in/out
ratios) to flag suspicious accounts. This represents the realistic pro-
duction baseline rather than an academic benchmark.
4.2 Classification Performance
Table 3 summarises the available classification metrics for the Light-
GBM model on the held-out test set.
Threshold selection and model performance.Each week,
the model scores between 20,000 and 30,000 cases, of which analysts
can investigate approximately 100. The operating threshold of 0.8
was selected as the F1-optimal cut-off, meaning it is the score above
which the balance between precision and recall is maximised. This
threshold determines which cases are surfaced as alerts from the
full scored population, reducing tens of thousands of cases to a
queue that fits within analyst capacity.
Precision-recall trade-off.At threshold 0.8, the model achieves
a mean precision of 0.909 and a mean recall of 0.816 across the four
December 2025 backtesting weeks. The high precision means that
Table 3: LightGBM model performance on the held-out test
set. Precision, recall, and F1-score are reported at the opera-
tional threshold of 0.8.
Metric Value
Precision 0.909
Recall 0.816
F1-Score 0.860
AUC-ROC 0.824
AUC-PR 0.943
Log-Loss 0.450
approximately 9 in 10 cases flagged to analysts are genuine money
mules, keeping the workload focused and efficient. The recall of
0.816 reflects the inherent cost of setting a high threshold: roughly 1
in 5 true money mule cases score below 0.8 and are not immediately
escalated. This trade-off is a deliberate design choice. Setting the
threshold lower would recover more true cases but would also
push the weekly alert volumes beyond what analysts can handle,
diluting the quality of reviews. The F1 score of 0.860 at this threshold
represents the best achievable balance between detection coverage
and operational precision given the analyst capacity constraint.
It is important to note that the backtesting evaluation was con-
ducted on the reviewed cases available from that a subset period of
the full weekly population. This could be interpreted as an estimate
of model performance rather than a count of production alerts.
Beyond the backtesting evaluation, the model’s real-world effec-
tiveness is validated through the yield rate. Over the four weeks
of December 2025, analysts reviewed 100 model-selected cases per
week. Of these, 89% were confirmed as true money mules, yielding
a production precision that directly reflects how useful the model’s
prioritisation is in practice.
The yield rate of 89% means that analysts spent the vast majority
of their review capacity on genuine cases, with fewer than 11 in
every 100 alerts turning out to be false escalations. This level of
precision is operationally meaningful in a context where analyst
time is the binding constraint. A high yield rate ensures that the 100-
case weekly capacity is not diluted by noise, allowing investigators
to focus their effort on the highest-risk cases.
Calibration.The LightGBM model outputs raw probability
scores that were subsequently adjusted using Platt scaling, which
is a post-hoc calibration technique that fits a logistic regression on
a held-out calibration validation set to map raw model scores to
better-aligned probabilities. This ensures that a predicted score of
0.8 more faithfully reflects an empirical probability of 80% of money
mule behaviour, rather than being an arbitrary model output.
Calibration quality is assessed using the Expected Calibration
Error (ECE), which measures the weighted average gap between
predicted scores and observed positive rates across score bins. The
combined ECE across all four December 2025 backtesting weeks is
0.079, indicating acceptable calibration overall.
Figure 2 illustrates the reliability diagram of the model. In the
high-score region (score≥ 0.8), where the operating threshold sits at
0.8, the model curve closely tracks the perfect calibration diagonal,
with an ECE of 0.021. The zigzag pattern in the lower score range
PAGE 6
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, K. Razis, N. Choo, K. Wong, X. Tang, K. Zhu, W. Lee, and J. Zhao
Figure 2: Reliability diagram for the LightGBM + Platt-scaled
model across four December 2025 backtesting weeks (com-
bined). The dashed line represents perfect calibration. The
shaded region (score < 0.8) contains sparse labelled bins and
is excluded from calibration interpretation. The operating
threshold is set at 0.8. Sample sizes per bin are annotated
for the high-score region (score ≥ 0.8). ECE ( ≥ 0.8) = 0.021;
combined ECE (all bins)=0.079.
attributes to small bin sample sizes (𝑛≤ 8) rather than systematic
miscalibration, and falls outside the operationally relevant score
range. The 𝑛= 102bin at score ≈ 0.97, representing the largest and
most reliable sample. This aligns closely with the diagonal, further
supporting calibration quality at the decision boundary.
4.3 Feature Importance
We use mean absolute SHAP values across the test set to assess
global feature importance. Figure 3 presents a beeswarm plot of
the top 15 features ranked by mean |SHAP|, pooled across 400
scored customers from the four December 2025 backtesting weeks,
collectively accounting for approximately 46% of the total mean
absolute SHAP mass across all 280 features.
The analysis reveals two dominant feature groups. Account de-
mographic features occupy the top three positions, collectively
accounting for 19.5% of total mean absolute SHAP mass. The top-
ranked feature is days_since_birth (mean |SHAP|= 1.31), then
account_open_num (1.21) andaccount_open_days_since_latest
(0.81). Directionally, higher values of days_since_birth are as-
sociated with increased risk, indicating that older customers are
disproportionately flagged, potentially reflecting greater vulnera-
bility to recruitment as money mules. account_open_num exhibits
a bimodal distribution, where both very low and very high values
push predictions toward higher risk, suggesting that newly created
single-account holders and accounts with an unusually large num-
ber of linked accounts are flagged. Transaction pattern features
(ranks 4-15) contribute a further 26.5%, with credit-to-debit ratio
features across multiple lookback windows (7, 30, 90, and 180 days)
and minimum credit amount features emerging as the most discrim-
inative among them. Notably, lower transaction activity and lower
credit amounts consistently shift SHAP values negative, implying
Figure 3: SHAP beeswarm plot of the top 15 features by mean
|SHAP| value. Each point represents one of the 400 scored
customers pooled across four December 2025 backtesting
weeks (W1-W4). Features are ordered top-to-bottom by de-
creasing mean absolute SHAP value. Point colour encodes
the direction of each feature’s contribution. Red indicates
the feature value pushes the model prediction toward higher
risk, while blue indicates a risk-reducing effect. The 𝑥-axis
represents the SHAP value, with positive values increasing
predicted risk and negative values decreasing it. Features are
grouped into Account demographics (top 3) and Transaction
patterns (ranks 4-15).
that financially inactive accounts are a stronger mule signal than
volume-driven behaviour. Although multiple ratio features share
similar lookback windows and may exhibit collinearity, SHAP val-
ues are computed on model output directly and thus reflect marginal
contribution after all feature interactions are accounted for.
4.4 LLM Explanation Evaluation
We evaluated three open-weight LLM families, GPT-OSS-120B,
Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B, and Gemma-3-27B, on 20 confirmed money-
mule alerts under the production prompt template (Appendix A).
Each output was scored on a 1-5 scale (higher is better) across four
dimensions by blinded independent evaluators:
• Factual accuracy:numeric values, percentile claims, and
feature descriptions are faithful to the case input; every cited
feature resolves to one present in the top-10 SHAP evidence;
no fabricated SHAP values.
• Typology plausibility:each flag maps a real data pattern
to a recognised mule typology such as pass-through, veloc-
ity spikes, credit-to-debit imbalance, high activity in new
accounts, counterparty diversity, or dormant reactivation.
• Completeness:coverage of the material signals, especially
raw feature value exceeds 90th percentile of the training pop-
ulation, that an analyst would expect to see in the narrative.
PAGE 7
Detection, Attribution, Narration: An End-to-End Pipeline for Explainable Money Mule Identification KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea
Table 4: LLM model comparison on 20 confirmed money-mule alerts. Rubric dimensions are 1-5 mean scores (higher is better);
latency is the mean wall-clock inference time per alert on the same single-H100 on-premise deployment.
Model Factual Accuracy Typology Plausibility Completeness Actionability Latency (s/alert)
GPT-OSS-120B 4.20 3.50 2.90 3.35 5.7
Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B 3.65 3.35 3.30 3.35 20.2
Gemma-3-27B 2.55 2.75 2.80 2.60 40.4
• Actionability:flags are distinct, data-anchored, and suitable
for direct use in analyst alert write-up without rewording.
Latency was measured separately as the mean wall-clock infer-
ence time per alert on the single-H100 on-premise deployment.
Table 4 summarises the results.
GPT-OSS-120B was selected for production. It has the highest
score for factual accuracy (4.20 vs. 3.65 and 2.55) and typology
plausibility, an equal score on actionability with Qwen, and is the
fastest of the three by 3-7× despite having the largest parameter
count. Two factors explain the speed. First, GPT-OSS and Qwen use
a mixture-of-experts architecture that activates only a fraction of
their parameters per token, while Gemma uses its full 27B parame-
ters at every step. Second, GPT-OSS produces shorter responses on
average, with 2.80 red flags per case versus 3.35 for Qwen and 3.55
for Gemma, so fewer tokens are streamed per alert.
Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B is still a viable fallback. It scores highest
on completeness by surfacing more red flags per case, but its factual
accuracy is lower. It is more prone to SHAP-value fabrication and
percentile-claim errors. Gemma-3-27B was ruled out because its
factual accuracy and its ∼40 s per-alert latency is uneconomical at
operational volumes. Across all three models, the most common
failure modes are exaggerated SHAP-value reporting, including
occasional 10× magnitude errors, and misinterpretation of credit-to-
debit ratio semantics. These observations motivated stricter prompt
constraints and periodic human review of generated narratives.
4.5 Production Deployment and Yield Rate
The complete pipeline has been deployed in a production AML
environment for 1 month, with alerts surfaced to a team of 3 three
full-time analysts. Table 5 compares the operational performance
of the proposed pipeline against the incumbent rule-based system,
which consists of 5 reports focused on identifying likely bad-actors
based on customer profile, non-financial and financial transaction
activity, and financial transaction network behaviour. The rule-
based metrics are blended across all 5 reports.
Table 5: Operational comparison: proposed pipeline vs. in-
cumbent rule-based system (metrics blended across 5 reports)
on live production alerts.
Metric Rule-Based
(blended across 5 reports)
Proposed
Yield Rate 61% 89%
Monthly Alert Volume 211 302
The yield rate improvement from 61% to over 89% represents a
substantial reduction in false positives surfaced to analysts, allow-
ing the team to focus investigative effort on genuinely suspicious
accounts. The concurrent rise in monthly alert volume from 211 to
302 reflects broader coverage rather than noise. This indicates that
the model surfaces more true positives that the rule-based system
had previously missed, without proportionally increasing analyst
burden given the higher yield.
Analyst feedback on LLM narratives.Appendix B shows two
representative LLM outputs alongside the analyst verdicts they
received. Through structured feedback sessions, analysts reported
that LLM-generated narratives meaningfully reduced the cognitive
effort required during alert triage. Specifically, analysts noted that
narratives allowed them to quickly assess whether a prediction was
plausible before committing to a full investigation, and that the
structured format (red flags, supporting reasons, and evidence ref-
erences) aligned well with their existing workflow. Representative
analyst feedback highlighted two particularly valued capabilities.
First, analysts noted that the narratives“provide clear guidance into
why an alert is classified as higher risk rather than typical customer
behaviour and draw attention to specific non-financial red flags that
we may not typically monitor. ”Second, analysts identified a proac-
tive monitoring use case: the LLM“has the capability to help filter
higher-risk alerts with low transaction values”, cases where suspi-
cious behavioural signals are present but adverse transactions have
not yet materialised. Rather than dismissing these as low-priority,
analysts noted that such alerts can be placed under short-term
internal monitoring (typically a few weeks), as flagged accounts
frequently exhibit adverse activity within that window. This sug-
gests the system supports not only point-in-time triage but also
early-warning identification of emerging money mule activity.
5 Discussion
5.1 Why ML Outperforms Rules
The improvement in yield rate from 61% to over 89% reflects a fun-
damental difference in how the two approaches model the behavior
of the mule. Rule-based systems operate on individual features in
isolation: a single rule might flag accounts exceeding a velocity
threshold, while another targets unusual counterparty counts. Each
rule captures one behavioural dimension, and combining rules mul-
tiplicatively creates rigid decision boundaries that are brittle to
slight variations in mule tactics.
The LightGBM model, by contrast, learns non-linear interactions
across hundreds of features simultaneously. Money mule behaviour
is inherently multi-dimensional, where no single feature is diagnos-
tic, but the combination of moderate anomalies across transaction
velocity, temporal patterns, and counterparty diversity creates a
PAGE 8
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, K. Razis, N. Choo, K. Wong, X. Tang, K. Zhu, W. Lee, and J. Zhao
distinctive signature. Gradient boosting captures these joint effects
naturally through its sequential tree-building process, without re-
quiring analysts to manually specify interaction rules.
A practical consequence is that the ML pipeline also produces
higher-quality alerts at a greater volume, giving analysts more cases
to review without sacrificing precision. Critically, when analyst
capacity increases, the alert volume can be scaled up simply with
only marginal loss in yield rate. Rule-based systems lack this flexi-
bility, where tightening one rule often requires loosening another
to maintain coverage. Consequently, it is difficult to scale detection
without disproportionately inflating false positives.
5.2 The Value of LLM-Generated Narratives
A key observation from deployment is that classification perfor-
mance alone was insufficient to drive analyst adoption. Early itera-
tions of the pipeline surfaced SHAP waterfall plots alongside the
mule probability score, but analyst feedback indicated that inter-
preting raw feature attributions was time-consuming and required
familiarity with the model’s feature definitions.
The addition of LLM-generated narratives changed the interac-
tion dynamic. Rather than synthesising meaning from a bar chart
of 10 numeric values, analysts could read a concise summary that
contextualised the risk factors in domain-relevant language (e.g.,
“a sudden spike in inflows relative to the account’s longer-term
baseline” rather than “txn_credit_p7d_p180d_ratio_sum: SHAP
= +0.34”). Analysts reported that this reduced the time to form an
initial hypothesis about if an alert warranted deeper investigation.
This finding aligns with recent work on XAI narratives. Cedro
and Martens [3] found that over 90% of non-experts rated SHAP-
based narratives as convincing, and Zytek et al. [19] showed user
preference for LLM narratives over SHAP plots. Our contribution
extends these findings to a production AML environment, where
the stakes and the scrutiny are considerably higher.
5.3 Limitations
We identify a few limitations of the current work as follows.
• Single-institution evaluation.All results are from one
financial institution. Mule typologies, transaction patterns,
and label distributions vary across geographies and banking
products, and the pipeline’s performance may not transfer
directly without retraining and feature adaptation.
• Label quality.Ground truth is constructed from police force
filings and human analyst confirmations. Both carry inher-
ent limitations. Police filings may be filed with a delay, and
analysts may disagree on borderline cases. Furthermore, un-
detected mules represent survivorship bias in the negative
class. The yield rate metric partially mitigates this by measur-
ing confirmed outcomes, but underlying label noise remains.
• LLM hallucination residual risk.Despite prompt con-
straints and periodic human review, LLM-generated nar-
ratives can occasionally produce plausible-sounding state-
ments that subtly misrepresent the underlying SHAP evi-
dence. In a compliance context, even infrequent hallucina-
tions carry reputational and regulatory risk. Ongoing moni-
toring and periodic manual audits are essential.
5.4 Ethical Considerations
Deploying ML for financial crime detection carries fairness and ac-
countability risks. The model must not disproportionately flag cus-
tomers based on protected or sensitive characteristics. The feature
set excludes gender and ethnicity, but it does include age-related
and geography-related variables, such as customer age, country
of domicile, and transaction geographies. These variables may be
relevant for financial crime risk assessment, but they can also intro-
duce proxy-discrimination risks. We therefore treat demographic
and geography-linked features as requiring explicit governance,
monitoring, and periodic review rather than assuming that their
inclusion is automatically fair or risk-free.
The LLM interpretation layer introduces an additional fairness
and conduct risk. Generated narratives may influence analyst judg-
ment even when they are intended only as explanatory aids. To
mitigate this risk, the prompt template constrains the LLM to cite
only SHAP-supported evidence from the case input and to avoid un-
supported speculation. In addition, generated narratives are subject
to periodic human review for factual consistency, discriminatory
framing, and inappropriate escalation language. The LLM output is
not treated as an independent basis for adverse action; final deci-
sions remain with trained financial-crime analysts following the
institution’s standard review process.
6 Conclusions
This paper presents an end-to-end pipeline for money mule detec-
tion that combines account-level classification, feature attribution,
and LLM-generated natural-language explanations. A LightGBM
model trained on 280 engineered features produces calibrated mule
probability scores. TreeSHAP decomposes each prediction into
per-feature contributions. A self-hosted LLM translates the top-10
attributions into analyst-facing narratives under structured prompt
constraints. In live production deployment, the pipeline achieves
a yield rate of 89%, up from 61% under the incumbent rule-based
system. Monthly alert volume expanded from 211 to 302, reflecting
broader true-positive coverage. This corresponds to 60% incremen-
tal adverse detection beyond existing review workflows, substan-
tially outperforming the incumbent rule-based approaches. Analyst
feedback confirms that LLM-generated narratives reduce cognitive
load during triage compared to raw SHAP visualisations.
Three findings may be of broader interest to practitioners deploy-
ing ML in regulated financial environments. First, the operational
bottleneck in AML detection is often not model accuracy butexpla-
nation usability. Thus, the LLM interpretation layer was critical to
analyst adoption. Second, open-weight models deployed on-premise
can satisfy data residency requirements without sacrificing expla-
nation quality, making this approach viable for institutions that
cannot use external API-based services. Third, structured prompt
templates and periodic human review offer a practical path to re-
ducing hallucination risk in high-stakes settings, although residual
risk remains and requires ongoing monitoring.
References
[1] Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin
Arbus, Rahul K Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, et al. 2025. gpt-oss-120b
& gpt-oss-20b model card.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925(2025).
PAGE 9
Detection, Attribution, Narration: An End-to-End Pipeline for Explainable Money Mule Identification KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea
[2] Marilyn Bello, Rafael Bello, María-Matilde García, Ann Nowé, Iván Sevillano-
García, and Francisco Herrera. 2025. A three-Level Framework for LLM-Enhanced
eXplainable AI: From technical explanations to natural language.Information
Systems Frontiers(2025), 1–22.
[3] Mateusz Cedro and David Martens. 2025. GraphXAIN: narratives to explain
graph neural networks. InWorld Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence.
Springer, 91–114.
[4] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 2024. Regulation (EU)
2024/1689. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj Official Journal of the
European Union.
[5] Zhenfeng Huang. 2025. Enhancing Anti-Money Laundering by Money Mules De-
tection on Transaction Graphs. InProceedings of the 2025 International Conference
on Generative Artificial Intelligence for Business. 83–88.
[6] Ganesh Jambhrunkar, Harsh Sharma, Saurav Singla, and Thirumalai Kailasam.
2025. MuleTrack: A Lightweight Temporal Learning Framework for Money Mule
Detection in Digital Payments. InInternational Work-Conference on Artificial
Neural Networks. Springer, 384–397.
[7] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma,
Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2017. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting
decision tree.Advances in neural information processing systems30 (2017).
[8] Scott M Lundberg, Gabriel Erion, Hugh Chen, Alex DeGrave, Jordan M Prutkin,
Bala Nair, Ronit Katz, Jonathan Himmelfarb, Nisha Bansal, and Su-In Lee. 2020.
From local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for trees.
Nature machine intelligence2, 1 (2020), 56–67.
[9] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions.Advances in neural information processing systems30 (2017).
[10] David Martens, James Hinns, Camille Dams, Mark Vergouwen, and Theodoros
Evgeniou. 2025. Tell me a story! Narrative-driven XAI with Large Language
Models.Decision Support Systems191 (2025), 114402.
[11] Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. 2011. Supervisory Guidance on Model
Risk Management. https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2011/bulletin-
2011-12a.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[12] Tahereh Pourhabibi, Kok-Leong Ong, Booi H Kam, and Yee Ling Boo. 2020. Fraud
detection: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection
approaches.Decision Support Systems133 (2020), 113303.
[13] David Savage, Qingmai Wang, Xiuzhen Zhang, Pauline Chou, and Xinghuo Yu.
2017. Detection of Money Laundering Groups: Supervised Learning on Small
Networks.. InAAAI Workshops. 5–11.
[14] Altyeb Altaher Taha and Sharaf Jameel Malebary. 2020. An intelligent approach
to credit card fraud detection using an optimized light gradient boosting machine.
IEEE access8 (2020), 25579–25587.
[15] Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupati-
raju, Shreya Pathak, Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Juliette
Love, et al. 2024. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08295(2024).
[16] Biao Xu, Yao Wang, Xiuwu Liao, and Kaidong Wang. 2023. Efficient fraud
detection using deep boosting decision trees.Decision Support Systems175 (2023),
114037.
[17] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng,
Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical
report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388(2025).
[18] Xianlong Zeng. 2024. Enhancing the interpretability of SHAP values using large
language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00079(2024).
[19] Alexandra Zytek, Sara Pido, Sarah Alnegheimish, Laure Berti-Equille, and Kalyan
Veeramachaneni. 2024. Explingo: Explaining ai predictions using large language
models. In2024 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData). IEEE, 1197–
1208.
A Prompt Template
This appendix reproduces the prompt used for production deploy-
ment and for the LLM evaluation reported in Section 4.4. The
prompt consists of a system message (Listing 1) that defines the
analyst role, input fields, and required JSON schema, followed by a
user message (Listing 2) that injects the per-case SHAP attribution
payload at the position marked<CASE_JSON>.
You are a financial crime analyst specializing in detecting Money
Mule activities. Your task is to analyze individual cases by
examining:
- Feature values (value_raw): Metrics describing transaction
behavior or customer profiles, along with their corresponding
90th percentile (ref_p90, above_p90) and 50th percentile
(ref_p50) benchmarks across all cases.
- Feature meanings (feature_meaning): Clear explanations of what
each feature name (name) represents.
- SHAP values (shap) and absolute SHAP values (abs_shap):
Indicators of each feature's impact on the model's prediction
for the case.
- Overall risk score and percentile (model_score and
score_percentile): The case's risk assessment and its relative
standing among all evaluated cases.
Based on this information, identify potential suspicious patterns
or red flags that explain why the case has its current risk
score. Please explain your findings in plain language,
avoiding technical jargon, so that analysts without
specialized technical knowledge can easily understand. Please
also keep it simple.
Please respond strictly in **valid JSON** following exactly this
schema:
{
"case_id": "<string>",
"red_flags": [
{
"potential_pattern": "<short description of suspicious
pattern>",
"reason": "<detailed reason linking features and SHAP values
to the issue>",
"evidence_references": ["<feature_name>", "..."]
}
]
}
Listing 1: System prompt.
Analyze the following case:
Input data for a case:
<CASE_JSON>
Output (JSON format only):
Listing 2: User message.
B Example LLM Outputs and Analyst Reviews
This appendix presents two representative LLM-generated red flag
narratives produced by the production pipeline (Section 4.4), to-
gether with the corresponding analyst verdicts recorded after man-
ual review. For readability, we present the narrative content ex-
tracted from the JSON outputs rather than the full raw JSON ob-
jects. In both cases the analyst confirmed the alert as adverse and
classified it under the money-mule typology (MM/UML).
The ratio of transactions in the past 7 days compared to the past
180 days is significantly higher than typical, and the total
transaction value in the past 7 days is also elevated. This
suggests a recent increase in activity that could be
suspicious. The customer holds a relatively high number of
open accounts (5), and the entity has been around for a
considerable time (over 32 years). This, combined with the
recent activity surge, could indicate an attempt to use
established accounts for illicit purposes. The days since the
last account opening is relatively short, which could indicate
a sudden increase in account activity. This, combined with the
recent surge in transaction activity, could be a red flag.
Listing 3: Example 1 — LLM-generated red flag narrative.
PAGE 10
KDD’26 - MLF workshop, August 9 - 13, 2026, Jeju, Korea Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jin, K. Razis, N. Choo, K. Wong, X. Tang, K. Zhu, W. Lee, and J. Zhao
The model flags this case as very high risk (99.44 percentile).
This is driven by a combination of factors. The customer
receives money from a very high number of different people (97
counterparties in the last 180 days) and sends money to a
larger than typical number of countries (9 countries in the
last 180 days). The number of open accounts is also a
contributing factor. This, combined with a relatively low
total transaction value and the age of the account, suggests
potential money mule activity.
Listing 4: Example 2 — LLM-generated red flag narrative.